CAN LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS DESIGN A ROBOT?
Authors:
*[1,2] Francesco Stella, francesco.stella@ep.ch,
[2,3] Cosimo Della Santina, c.dellasantina@tudelft.nl
[1] Josie Hughes, josie.hughes@ep.ch
Aliations:
[1] CREATE Lab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
[2] Department of Cognitive Robotics, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands.
[3] Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Wessling, Germany.
*Corresponding author
Abstract. Large Language Models can lead researchers in the design of robots.
Large Language Models (LLMs) [1], are revolutionizing the eld of robotics, providing robots with the ability to
understand and process natural language at a level previously thought impossible. These powerful AI tools have the
potential to improve a wide range of tasks in robotics, including natural language understanding, decision making,
and human-robot interaction. One of the key advantages of large language models is their ability to process large
amounts of text data, such as instructions, technical manuals, and maintenance logs, and internalize an implicit
knowledge containing rich information about the world from which factual answers can be extracted. In fact, the
text you have just read was generated by the LLM ChatGPT-3 [2] when prompted \Can you write an introduction
in a newsy style to the potential of large language models in robotics?".
Language models have long been used in robotics to translate natural language instructions into actions executable
by robots [3][4], synthesize code from text prompts [5] and nd relationships between dierent elds of knowledge. In
light of these impressive capabilities, LLMs may now contribute to another bottleneck of robotics, design. Leveraging
their emerging capabilities [6], LLMs can deliver a dialogue that enables, teaches, and guides humans in building a
robot from scratch. These capabilities could fundamentally change the methodology by which we design robots, and
could shift the role of humans from designer or engineer to technician. So, to what extent can ChatGPT-3 replace
an engineer and design a robot?
To generate the rst ChatGPT-3 designed robot we approach the task in a two step approach. In the rst
high-level phase, the computer and the human collaborate on a conceptual level, discussing ideas and outlining the
specications for the robot design while in the second phase the physical implementation of the design specications
takes place. As an example of this AI-driven design process, we consider the challenge of a human engineer driven
by the desire to \help the world with robotics," as shown in Figure 1. The human operator starts by asking the
LLM which are the future challenges for humanity and promptly gets an overview with a clear outline of the main
hazards. The human can then select the option they are most interested in and narrow down the design space by
asking for clarications. This interaction can span multiple elds of knowledge and levels of abstraction, ranging
from concepts to technical implementation. In this way, the human can spot new intersections between research
elds, such as agriculture and robotics, and consider factors that are hardly part of the experience of an engineer
by training, such as what is the crop that is economically most valuable to automate. By iterating this process, the
LLM and the human converge to the technical design specications of a robotic system.
Typically, in a computational design framework, the computer solves technical problems specied by the human.
In this case, conversely the LLM proposes conceptual options to the human, who then selects the most appealing
choice. In this sense, the LLM acts as the researcher, leveraging knowledge and nding interdisciplinary connections,
while the human acts as a manager, providing direction to the design. The application is selected as an output of
Date : December 2022.
1arXiv:2303.15324v1  [cs.RO]  15 Mar 2023
2 CAN LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS DESIGN A ROBOT?
How can robotics 
support agriculture?
Food supply
Aging population
Climate changeWhat are the future 
challenges for 
humanity?
2020304050
1010
0
20406080100120
0°C°FCrop harvesting
Parasite control
Packaging 
Navigation
Gripping
Compliant interaction
EfficiencyWhat features 
should a robot 
harvester have?
Large Language 
ModelsOval Scoop
In control Embodied
f(x)What shape should the 
gripper have ?
How should the compliance 
be included?
Actuated
 PassiveHow should the gripper interact 
with the tomato plant?
-
●Manufacturing 
process selection
●CAD design support
●Material selection
●Size specifications
●Silicone selection
●Guidance on the 
molding process
●Silicone PLA 
connection
●Motor selection 
●Python code 
generation 
●Pulley system design 
specifications High level 
design 
discussion
Technical 
implementationDesign 
specificationsReal-world 
evaluation
Biology
Neuroscience
Economics
Figure 1. On the left, the two phases of the design process: rst the human and LLM discuss the specics
application and of the design and later the human implements them. On the right, a pictorial overview of
the discussion, with the questions prompted by the human on top, and the options provided by the LLM
below. The green color highlights the decision tree of the human, which gradually focuses the problem to
match his goal.
this rst part of the process, and a set of initial technical specications are generated. This includes code, material,
components, manufacturing method selection, and mechanism design. In the second, low-level phase of the design
process, these directions need to be translated into a physical and functioning robot. Although LLMs can currently
not generate entire CAD models, test code, or automatically fabricate the robot, recent advances have shown that
AI algorithms can support the technical implementation of software [7], mathematical reasoning [8], or even shape
generation [9]. Thus, we expect that, in the near future, AI-generated inputs will highly support a large set of tech-
nical tasks. However, in the foreseeable future, humans will remain mainly in charge of the technical implementation
of the robotic solution. The human is therefore relegated to the technician role, polishing the code proposed by
the LLM, nalizing the CAD, and fabricating the robot. This robot can then be tested in real-world scenarios, and
a new conversation with the LLM can be used to iterate on the design process in light of experimental evidence.
As an example of this second phase, Figure 2 displays the main outputs generated by the LLM and the real-world
deployment of the AI-designed robotic gripper for crop harvesting.
From this exploration we can foresee dierent modalities of human-AI interaction and collaboration. At one ex-
treme, the LLMs could provide all the input required for robot design, which the human follows blindly. The AI is
the inventor, addressing human questions and providing `creativity', technical knowledge and expertise, whereas the
human deals with the technical implementation. This could indirectly foster transfer and democratization of knowl-
edge, by enabling non-specialists to realize robotic systems. A more moderate, yet powerful approach is collaborative
exploration between the LLM and the human, leveraging the ability of the LLM to provide interdisciplinary and
wide ranging knowledge to augment the human's expertise. Finally, we can consider a third approach in which the
LLM acts as a funnel, helping to rene the design process and providing technical input whilst the human remains
the inventor or scientist involved in the process. This collaboration between AI and humans presents clear benets
and opportunities. By augmenting human knowledge with LLMs, this methodology removes the limits imposed by
the learning process and supports the human in nding relevant connections between elds, making interdisciplinary
research and reasoning more accessible. It can spur the curiosity of researchers, interactively teach new robotics
engineers, and accelerate the design process. As seen in our demonstration, the relationship between human and AI
may vary for dierent parts of the design process depending on the skill and expertise of the individual and the goal
of the robotic design process. At the same time, the introduction of LLMs into the design of robots brings questions
CAN LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS DESIGN A ROBOT? 3
Real-world solution
"One possible shape for a gripper that is 
designed to grasp tomatoes could be a 
round or oval shape that is slightly larger 
than the tomato""Overall, a Dynamixel motor is 
suitable for actuating a gripper for 
picking tomatoes""One way to build a gripper for handling 
crops would be to use silicone or rubber, 
which are both soft and flexible, helping to 
reduce the risk of crushing the crops"
"One way to connect the oval shape 
of a gripper to a motor would be to 
use a gear or pulley system. This 
could involve attaching a pulley to 
the output shaft of the motor, and 
then connecting the gripper to the 
pulley using a linkage such as a 
belt, chain, or cable""Here is an example of 
how you might use Python 
to control a Dynamixel 
motor"
import pyDynamixel
dynamixel = 
pyDynamixel.Dynamixel(port="COM3")
dynamixel.set_torque_limit(1.0)
dynamixel.set_goal_position(0.0)
Figure 2. An AI designed this robotic gripper.
regarding its potentially negative eects on scientic disciplines and engineering - a creative, interdisciplinary, and
IP-creating process that currently relies on highly-skilled professionals. In this regard, it is pivotal to point out
that LLMs should be regarded as an evolution of search engines, generating the "most probable" answer to a given
prompt [10]. As such, it is debatable if they can develop creative solutions that substantially advance the robotics
discipline beyond what is already known by the scientic community. But unlike search engines, LLMs can propose
ways to integrate 'knowledge' and apply it to unseen problems, thus providing a potentially false impression that new
knowledge is being generated. Moreover, we see another potential issue in the widespread use of LLMs in our eld.
As the same trained model is accessible to everybody, it could create a bias in researchers' focus toward solutions
that the model statistically prefers. This way, it may hinder the exploration of new technological solutions. Finally,
this ability of the LLM to apply and adapt prior experience to new problems could prevent humans from taking
responsibility for the solutions developed [11], which could lead to dangerous outcomes and a lack of human creativity
in the design process. This could prohibit and stagnate the advancement of new robotic technologies and designs.
There are also signicant societal and ethical implications resulting from human-AI interactions for robot design.
LLMs could automate high-level cognitive design tasks, and have humans focusing on more technical jobs. This could
redene the set of skills that are required by an engineer, and change the education that engineers should receive.
Finally, there are key issues regarding plagiarism, traceability and IP [12]. Can a design created via LLM be consid-
ered to be novel as it builds only on prior knowledge [13], and also how can this previous knowledge be referenced?
Similarly, if human-AI collaboration leads to the creation of novel IP, is this not a function of the training data
of the LLM? As this technology matures there are also longer term considerations including data-privacy, the fre-
quency of retraining and how new knowledge should be integrated to maintain the usability and relevancy of this tool.
To conclude, the robotics community must identify how to leverage these powerful tools to accelerate advances
and capabilities, yet doing so in an ethical, sustainable and socially empowering way. We must develop means of
acknowledging the use of LLMs [14], and also being able to trace the lineage of the generation of designs from LLM.
Looking forward, we strongly believe that LLMs will open many exciting possibilities and that they will be a force for
good if opportunely managed. The design process could be fully automated by combining collaborating LLMs to ask
and answer questions, with one helping to rene the other. This could also be augmented with automated fabrication
to allow for a fully autonomous pipeline for the creation of bespoke and optimized robotic systems. Ultimately, it
is an open question for the future of this eld if these tools can be used to assist robot developers and leverage
inter-disciplinary knowledge leading to new robotic capabilities, or does this lead to a long-term stagnation of the
eld, with lazy, unskilled engineers, relying on external computation to generate new knowledge?
4 CAN LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS DESIGN A ROBOT?
References
[1] Brants, T., Popat, A. C., Xu, P., Och, F. J. & Dean, J. Large language models in machine translation (2007).
[2] Floridi, L. & Chiriatti, M. Gpt-3: Its nature, scope, limits, and consequences. Minds and Machines 30, 681{694 (2020).
[3] Ahn, M. et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic aordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691 (2022).
[4] Huang, W., Abbeel, P., Pathak, D. & Mordatch, I. Language models as zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for
embodied agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 9118{9147 (PMLR, 2022).
[5] Budzianowski, P. & Vuli c, I. Hello, it's gpt-2{how can i help you? towards the use of pretrained language models for task-oriented
dialogue systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.05774 (2019).
[6] Wei, J. et al. Emergent abilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682 (2022).
[7] Chen, M. et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
[8] Alpha as the way to bring computational knowledge superpowers to chatgpt (2023). https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/
01/wolframalpha-as-the-way-to-bring-computational-knowledge-superpowers-to-chatgpt/ . Accessed: 2022-12-30.
[9] Ramesh, A., Dhariwal, P., Nichol, A., Chu, C. & Chen, M. Hierarchical text-conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.06125 (2022).
[10] Shanahan, M. Talking about large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03551 (2022).
[11] Stokel-Walker, C. Chatgpt listed as author on research papers: many scientists disapprove. Nature .
[12] Ai systems can't patent inventions, us federal circuit court conrms (2022). https://www.theverge.com/2022/8/8/23293353/
ai-patent-legal-status-us-federal-circuit-court-rules-thaler-dabus . Accessed: 2022-12-30.
[13] George, A. & Walsh, T. Can ai invent? Nature Machine Intelligence 1{4 (2022).
[14] Lee, J. Y. Can an articial intelligence chatbot be the author of a scholarly article? science editing 10, 7{12 (2023).
